Chapter One

Most highlighted section (self-absorbed)

> Martin didn't consider himself to be a hacker. 

So he is one, he just doesn't want to cop to the negative aspects of being one. This could be illustrative of his character -- he might be a shit head but refuse to look at his actions and other people's actions in a way that would lead to him realizing this about himself. 

On this night, Martin is alone in his apartment, a routine occurrence indicated by the TV in the background to provide "the illusion of human contact". 

Chapter Two

After zombieing his way through work, Martin comes home determined to never look at the file again. Like most good intentions, this one is immediately rationalized away, and Martin decides that he needs to understand the file first. 

His attempts to reason with the file run uncover some problems with his course of action. Specifically, none of the values in the file are labeled. His height, obviously, is something we'd recognize --- luckily it was in imperial units rather than metric --- but other stats could represent his intelligence, vision, number of heart beats remaining so discretion is probably the best part of valor here. 

He finds his bank balance, which he can be sure is correct, and shifts the decimal point one place to the right giving himself a balance of $835.00. This chapter we've already had some important information about Martin provided to us. One: his day job is not as a programmer, as you would conceivably believe from his hobbies. Shuffling paperwork and having a bank balance of $83.50 are not things that are typically associated with programmers. 

> there are two parts to any theft: taking a thing away from its owner, and keeping it for yourself. Martin wasn’t taking anything from anybody, so he figured it wasn’t theft, or at least that he was fifty percent less likely to get caught. It was flimsy reasoning, but it was good enough to let him sleep.

More rationalizations from Martin, along with a lot of assumptions about how the law works. This is a book, so something has to go wrong for the main character and it's a safe bet that Martin's going to end up in trouble because of his assumptions and general laziness. 

The chapter ends with Martin returning his bank balance to normal, mixing more bourbon and sleeping pills, sleepwalking through his next day of work, and thinking of all the things he shouldn't use the file to do. It seems like our Martin is maturing and becoming responsible when faced with the reality of his newfound power. 

> Having spent all Friday collecting dangerous ideas, that night when he sat at his computer, he had no shortage of things to try, and a whole weekend to try them in.

Nevermind. 

We're two chapters into the book now, and I think we're starting to get a pretty good handle on Martin as a person. He's smart, but seemingly low on willpower, gumption, possibly stick-to-it-iveness. At the very least he has the skills for a  job that would leave him with a checking account balance that's at least in the triple digits. 

There are convincing arguments to be made that money and creature comforts aren't everything, but I don't think they apply here. If Martin was deliberately going without work for the sake of art, or out of some moral stance, or even if it let him pursue the lifestyle he wanted to outside of work, then that would neatly justify his lifestyle. 

The fact is, after what can be assumed was a period of time going with the flow, Martin is now stuck in a rut. He's just doing the bare minimum to live at a relative level of comfort, and not doing anything to change that. He's at rest, in stasis, or if we put our judgmental hat, he's stuck. 

Or, was stuck. Finding the file is going to be the push that gets Martin out of his rut and into adventure --- which is a nice way of saying trouble. 

Next time we'll see how much trouble Martin can get himself into before other people start helping him into more. 
